Matrix representations of the symmetry operators
================================================

"*Matrix representations and basis vectors:*  In order to obtain a
matrix representation for each of the point isometries for a given
group, we need to select a basis for each group.

To accomplish this, we will define, for each crystallographic point
group G, a set of bases such that the matrix representations of the
isometries is [sic] the same for any basis in the set and such that
the matrices are of a simple form. In fact, each entry of the
resulting matrices will be either 1, 0 or -1. In chapter 6 we will
show that every lattice left invariant by a point group G will contain
a sublattice that has a basis of the type we define for G in this
chapter and the next" (Boisen & Gibbs, 1990: p. 141).


"(D6.2) *Definition:* A matrix T all of whose entries are integers is
called an _integral matrix_.  If, in addition det(T) = ±1, T is said
to be _unimodular over the integers_ or, for our purposes, simply
_unimodular_. If T is integral and det(T) = 1, then T is said to be a
_proper unimodular matrix_"  (Boisen & Gibbs, 1990: p. 200).


Unimodular Matrices
===================

"A unimodular matrix M is a square integer matrix having determinant
+1 or −1. Equivalently, it is an integer matrix that is invertible
over the integers: there is an integer matrix N that is its inverse"
(Wikipedia, 2022).

All orthogonal matrices are unimodular; isometries are represented by
orthogonal matrices in a Cartesian reference frame. (S.G.; proofs
are available and short (< 1 page))

However, in a non-Cartesian frame, isometry matrices may be
non-orthogonal (example: a tree-fold axis in a standard
crystallographic frame, cell parameters: a = b, c, 90, 90, 120,
matrix: [[0,-1,0],[1,-1,0],[0,0,1]]). The matrices will be still
unimodular (S.G.).

Not every unimodular matrix is orthogonal; a counterexample is
[[2,1],[1,1]] – it is unimodular but not orthogonal (S.G.).

Unimodular matrices and orthogonal matrices both are closed under
multiplication and inversion, and thus form subgroups of GL(n,ℝ).

Totally Unimodular Matrices
===========================

"A totally unimodular matrix (TU matrix) is a matrix for which every
square non-singular submatrix is unimodular. Equivalently, every
square submatrix has determinant 0, +1 or −1. A totally unimodular
matrix need not be square itself. From the definition it follows that
any submatrix of a totally unimodular matrix is itself totally
unimodular (TU). Furthermore it follows that any TU matrix has only 0,
+1 or −1 entries. The converse is not true, i.e., a matrix with only
0, +1 or −1 entries is not necessarily unimodular" (Wikipedia, 2022).

Thus, it seems that Boisen & Gibbs (1990: p. 200) claim that all
crystallographic operators will be represented by Non-singular Totally
Unimodular matrices (S.G.).

The terminology is confusing since a Totally Unimodular matrix may be
*not* Unimodular – it can be singular (det == 0) or even
non-square. We need to be careful with assumptions (S.G.).

Totally Unimodular Square Matrices are not Closed Under Multiplication
======================================================================

A counterexample (in 'ipython'):

	saulius@tasmanijos-velnias ~/ $ python
	Python 3.8.10 (default, May 26 2023, 14:05:08) 
	[GCC 9.4.0] on linux
	Type "help", "copyright", "credits" or "license" for more information.
	>>> from numpy import *
	>>> from scipy.linalg import det
	>>> m2 = matrix([[1, 0, 1], [0, -1, 1], [0, 1, 0]])
	>>> m2
	matrix([[ 1,  0,  1],
	        [ 0, -1,  1],
	        [ 0,  1,  0]])
	>>> det(m2)
	-1.0
	>>> m2 * m2
	matrix([[ 1,  1,  1],
	        [ 0,  2, -1],
	        [ 0, -1,  1]])
	>>> det(m2 * m2)
	1.0

Thus, the 'm2' matrix is non-singular and Totally Unimodular (TU)
(please double-check...), but the product 'm2*m2' is not, since it has
2 as an element (at i=2,j=2,one-based) (S.G.).

A Group of Symmetry Operations is a Group of TU Matrices? (S.G.)
================================================================

Since the crystallographic symmetry operations form a group under
multiplication and are represented by non-singular TU matrices
(NSTU). But the non-singular TU matrices, in general, are not closed
under multiplication and therefore do not form a group. Moreover, some
symmetry operations are represented by non-orthogonal matrices in some
frames, thus we can *not* say that space groups are represented by
orthogonal NSTU.

Thus there must be some additional condition (constraint) on NSTU
matrices that ensures the closure under multiplication. Unfortunately,
I can not formulate this condition at the moment.

An example of NSTU matrices that *do* from a group (a threefold
rotation around the z axis, forming a P3 space group):

	saulius@tasmanijos-velnias ~/ $ python
	Python 3.8.10 (default, May 26 2023, 14:05:08) 
	[GCC 9.4.0] on linux
	Type "help", "copyright", "credits" or "license" for more information.
	>>> from numpy import *
	>>> from scipy.linalg import det
	>>> r3 = matrix([[0, -1, 0], [1, -1, 0], [0, 0, 1]])
	>>> r3
	matrix([[ 0, -1,  0],
	        [ 1, -1,  0],
	        [ 0,  0,  1]])
	>>> r3 * r3
	matrix([[-1,  1,  0],
	        [-1,  0,  0],
	        [ 0,  0,  1]])
	>>> r3 * r3 * r3
	matrix([[1, 0, 0],
	        [0, 1, 0],
	        [0, 0, 1]])

We see that P3 is a cyclic group generated by r3; $r3^{-1} = r3^{2}$
The r3 element is represented by a non-orthogonal NSTU. The frame of
references uses three vectors a, b and c s.t. |a| = |b| /= |c|, α = β = 90°,
γ = 120°(S.G.).

References:
===========

1. Boisen, Jr., M. B. & Gibbs, G. V. (1990) Mathematical crystallography:
An introduction to the mathematical foundations of crystallography.
Mineralogical Society of America. In series: Ribbe,
P. H. (Ed.). Reviews in Mineralogy, vol. 15, Revised edition.

2. Wikipedia (2022) Unimodular matrix. URL:
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unimodular_matrix [Accessed:
2023-07-16T12:29+03:00; Permalink:
https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Unimodular_matrix&amp;oldid=1110420484].
